docs/topics/15-encryption.md, before:

# Settings Encryption

Automatically encrypt sensitive configuration values like connection strings and API secrets.

## Overview

- Sensitive values encrypted on first startup
- Decrypted transparently at runtime
- Supports Windows DPAPI and cross-platform Data Protection API

## Quick Start (Windows)

Windows uses DPAPI automatically — no setup required.

### Step 1: Configure Encryption

Add to `/config/settings.xml`:

```xml
<settings_encryption>
  <sections_to_encrypt>
    <section>ConnectionStrings</section>
    <section>authorize:providers:azure_b2c:client_secret</section>
  </sections_to_encrypt>
</settings_encryption>
```

### Step 2: Run Application

On first startup, unencrypted values are automatically encrypted:

**Before:**
```xml
<ConnectionStrings>
  <default>Server=myserver;Password=MySecret123!</default>
</ConnectionStrings>
```

**After:**
```xml
<ConnectionStrings>
  <default>encrypted:CfDJ8NhY2kB...long-base64-string...</default>
</ConnectionStrings>
```

Values are decrypted in memory — your code accesses them normally.

## Cross-Platform Setup

For Linux, macOS, Docker, or Kubernetes, configure a key directory:

```xml
<settings_encryption>
  <data_protection_key_path>./keys/</data_protection_key_path>
  <sections_to_encrypt>
    <section>ConnectionStrings</section>
  </sections_to_encrypt>
</settings_encryption>
```

Or via environment variable:
```bash
DATA_PROTECTION_KEY_PATH=./keys/
```

⚠️ **Important:** Persist the keys directory! Losing keys = losing access to encrypted values.

## Encryption Method Priority

1. **If `data_protection_key_path` configured** → ASP.NET Core Data Protection API
2. **Else if Windows** → DPAPI (machine-bound)
3. **Else** → Encryption disabled (passthrough mode)

## What to Encrypt

Specify paths in `sections_to_encrypt`:

| Path | What Gets Encrypted |
|------|---------------------|
| `ConnectionStrings` | All connection strings |
| `ConnectionStrings:default` | Only the "default" connection |
| `authorize:providers:azure_b2c` | All azure_b2c settings |
| `authorize:providers:azure_b2c:client_secret` | Only client_secret |

## Configuration Examples

### Encrypt All Connection Strings

```xml
<settings_encryption>
  <sections_to_encrypt>
    <section>ConnectionStrings</section>
  </sections_to_encrypt>
</settings_encryption>
```

### Encrypt Specific Items

```xml
<settings_encryption>
  <sections_to_encrypt>
    <section>ConnectionStrings:production</section>
    <section>authorize:providers:azure_b2c:client_secret</section>
    <section>authorize:providers:auth0:client_secret</section>
  </sections_to_encrypt>
</settings_encryption>
```

### Cross-Platform with Key Directory

```xml
<settings_encryption>
  <data_protection_key_path>/app/keys/</data_protection_key_path>
  <sections_to_encrypt>
    <section>ConnectionStrings</section>
  </sections_to_encrypt>
</settings_encryption>
```

## Docker/Kubernetes

### Docker Compose

```yaml
services:
  api:
    image: dbtorestapi
    volumes:
      - ./keys:/app/keys
    environment:
      - DATA_PROTECTION_KEY_PATH=/app/keys/
```

### Kubernetes

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
metadata:
  name: encryption-keys
spec:
  accessModes: [ReadWriteOnce]
  resources:
    requests:
      storage: 100Mi
---
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
spec:
  template:
    spec:
      containers:
        - name: api
          volumeMounts:
            - name: keys
              mountPath: /app/keys
          env:
            - name: DATA_PROTECTION_KEY_PATH
              value: /app/keys/
      volumes:
        - name: keys
          persistentVolumeClaim:
            claimName: encryption-keys
```

## Behavior

### First Run
1. Reads unencrypted values
2. Encrypts and writes back to XML
3. Continues with decrypted values in memory

### Subsequent Runs
1. Reads encrypted values
2. Decrypts in memory
3. Original XML unchanged

### Adding New Values
1. Add unencrypted value to config
2. Restart application
3. Value automatically encrypted

## Security Notes

### Windows DPAPI
- Keys bound to machine/user account
- Moving config files to different machine = values unreadable
- No additional key management

### Data Protection API
- Keys stored in specified directory
- Portable across machines with same keys
- **Must secure and backup key directory**

## Troubleshooting

| Issue | Solution |
|-------|----------|
| "encrypted:" values not decrypting | Check key directory exists and has correct permissions |
| Values not encrypting on startup | Verify `sections_to_encrypt` paths are correct |
| Cross-platform: encryption fails | Ensure `data_protection_key_path` is configured |
| Lost keys | Restore from backup, or re-enter unencrypted values |

## Best Practices

1. **Backup keys** when using Data Protection API
2. **Use environment-specific keys** (dev, staging, prod)
3. **Restrict access** to config files and key directories
4. **Don't commit** encrypted values to source control (still reveals structure)
5. **Test decryption** after deployment

## Related Topics

- [Configuration](02-configuration.md) - settings.xml structure
- [Authentication](12-authentication.md) - Encrypting auth secrets
- [Multi-Database](13-databases.md) - Encrypting connection strings

Commit message:

docs: mention encryption hot-reload - no restart needed
The encryption configuration is monitored via ChangeToken. Adding new
sections or values triggers automatic encryption on file save without
requiring an application restart. Fixed both tutorial and reference docs.

docs/topics/15-encryption.md, after:

# Settings Encryption

Automatically encrypt sensitive configuration values like connection strings and API secrets.

## Overview

- Sensitive values encrypted on first startup
- Decrypted transparently at runtime
- Supports Windows DPAPI and cross-platform Data Protection API

## Quick Start (Windows)

Windows uses DPAPI automatically — no setup required.

### Step 1: Configure Encryption

Add to `/config/settings.xml`:

```xml
<settings_encryption>
  <sections_to_encrypt>
    <section>ConnectionStrings</section>
    <section>authorize:providers:azure_b2c:client_secret</section>
  </sections_to_encrypt>
</settings_encryption>
```

### Step 2: Run Application

On first startup, unencrypted values are automatically encrypted:

**Before:**
```xml
<ConnectionStrings>
  <default>Server=myserver;Password=MySecret123!</default>
</ConnectionStrings>
```

**After:**
```xml
<ConnectionStrings>
  <default>encrypted:CfDJ8NhY2kB...long-base64-string...</default>
</ConnectionStrings>
```

Values are decrypted in memory — your code accesses them normally.

## Cross-Platform Setup

For Linux, macOS, Docker, or Kubernetes, configure a key directory:

```xml
<settings_encryption>
  <data_protection_key_path>./keys/</data_protection_key_path>
  <sections_to_encrypt>
    <section>ConnectionStrings</section>
  </sections_to_encrypt>
</settings_encryption>
```

Or via environment variable:
```bash
DATA_PROTECTION_KEY_PATH=./keys/
```

⚠️ **Important:** Persist the keys directory! Losing keys = losing access to encrypted values.

## Encryption Method Priority

1. **If `data_protection_key_path` configured** → ASP.NET Core Data Protection API
2. **Else if Windows** → DPAPI (machine-bound)
3. **Else** → Encryption disabled (passthrough mode)

## What to Encrypt

Specify paths in `sections_to_encrypt`:

| Path | What Gets Encrypted |
|------|---------------------|
| `ConnectionStrings` | All connection strings |
| `ConnectionStrings:default` | Only the "default" connection |
| `authorize:providers:azure_b2c` | All azure_b2c settings |
| `authorize:providers:azure_b2c:client_secret` | Only client_secret |

## Configuration Examples

### Encrypt All Connection Strings

```xml
<settings_encryption>
  <sections_to_encrypt>
    <section>ConnectionStrings</section>
  </sections_to_encrypt>
</settings_encryption>
```

### Encrypt Specific Items

```xml
<settings_encryption>
  <sections_to_encrypt>
    <section>ConnectionStrings:production</section>
    <section>authorize:providers:azure_b2c:client_secret</section>
    <section>authorize:providers:auth0:client_secret</section>
  </sections_to_encrypt>
</settings_encryption>
```

### Cross-Platform with Key Directory

```xml
<settings_encryption>
  <data_protection_key_path>/app/keys/</data_protection_key_path>
  <sections_to_encrypt>
    <section>ConnectionStrings</section>
  </sections_to_encrypt>
</settings_encryption>
```

## Docker/Kubernetes

### Docker Compose

```yaml
services:
  api:
    image: dbtorestapi
    volumes:
      - ./keys:/app/keys
    environment:
      - DATA_PROTECTION_KEY_PATH=/app/keys/
```

### Kubernetes

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
metadata:
  name: encryption-keys
spec:
  accessModes: [ReadWriteOnce]
  resources:
    requests:
      storage: 100Mi
---
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
spec:
  template:
    spec:
      containers:
        - name: api
          volumeMounts:
            - name: keys
              mountPath: /app/keys
          env:
            - name: DATA_PROTECTION_KEY_PATH
              value: /app/keys/
      volumes:
        - name: keys
          persistentVolumeClaim:
            claimName: encryption-keys
```

## Behavior

### First Run
1. Reads unencrypted values
2. Encrypts and writes back to XML
3. Continues with decrypted values in memory

### Subsequent Runs
1. Reads encrypted values
2. Decrypts in memory
3. Original XML unchanged

### Adding New Values
1. Add unencrypted value to config (or add a new section to `sections_to_encrypt`)
2. Save the file — the application detects the change automatically
3. Value encrypted without a restart

## Security Notes

### Windows DPAPI
- Keys bound to machine/user account
- Moving config files to different machine = values unreadable
- No additional key management

### Data Protection API
- Keys stored in specified directory
- Portable across machines with same keys
- **Must secure and backup key directory**

## Troubleshooting

| Issue | Solution |
|-------|----------|
| "encrypted:" values not decrypting | Check key directory exists and has correct permissions |
| Values not encrypting on startup | Verify `sections_to_encrypt` paths are correct |
| Cross-platform: encryption fails | Ensure `data_protection_key_path` is configured |
| Lost keys | Restore from backup, or re-enter unencrypted values |

## Best Practices

1. **Backup keys** when using Data Protection API
2. **Use environment-specific keys** (dev, staging, prod)
3. **Restrict access** to config files and key directories
4. **Don't commit** encrypted values to source control (still reveals structure)
5. **Test decryption** after deployment

## Related Topics

- [Configuration](02-configuration.md) - settings.xml structure
- [Authentication](12-authentication.md) - Encrypting auth secrets
- [Multi-Database](13-databases.md) - Encrypting connection strings
