docs/tutorial/06-xml-structure.md, before:

# XML Configuration Structure

So far we've been adding endpoints and tags to `sql.xml` without stepping back to look at the full picture. In this topic, we'll explore the complete XML configuration system — how files relate to each other, what every tag does, and how configuration features like hot-reload, encryption, and multi-file organization work.

## The Configuration File Map

```
config/
├── settings.xml          ← The hub: connection strings, global settings, file references
├── sql.xml               ← API endpoint definitions
├── api_keys.xml          ← API key collections
├── api_gateway.xml       ← Proxy/gateway route definitions
├── file_management.xml   ← File upload/download store configurations
├── auth_providers.xml    ← OIDC/JWT authentication providers
└── regex.xml             ← Custom parameter regex patterns
```

**`settings.xml` is the hub** — it references all other config files through the `<additional_configurations>` block:

```xml
<settings>
  <ConnectionStrings>
    <default><![CDATA[...]]></default>
  </ConnectionStrings>

  <additional_configurations>
    <path>config/sql.xml</path>
    <path>config/api_gateway.xml</path>
    <path>config/api_keys.xml</path>
    <path>config/file_management.xml</path>
    <path>config/regex.xml</path>
    <path>config/auth_providers.xml</path>
  </additional_configurations>
</settings>
```

The application reads `settings.xml` first, then loads each file listed in `<additional_configurations>`. All loaded configurations merge into a single in-memory settings tree.

## Hot-Reload: Edit Without Restarting

All configuration files are monitored for changes. When you save a file:

1. The application detects the change
2. It reloads the affected configuration
3. New requests use the updated configuration

**No restart required.** This applies to all config files — `sql.xml`, `api_keys.xml`, `api_gateway.xml`, etc.

> **Exception**: Adding or removing `<path>` entries in `<additional_configurations>` may require a restart depending on the `<restart_on_path_changes>` setting. Content changes within existing files always reload automatically.

## The Complete sql.xml Tag Reference

Here's every tag you can use inside an endpoint definition:

```xml
<settings>
  <queries>  <!-- Some config files use <queries>, the endpoing definitions work the same regardless -->
    <endpoint_name>

      <!-- Routing -->
      <route>custom/path/{{id}}</route>
      <verb>GET</verb>

      <!-- Parameters -->
      <mandatory_parameters>id,name</mandatory_parameters>

      <!-- Database -->
      <connection_string_name>analytics</connection_string_name>

      <!-- Query -->
      <query><![CDATA[ SELECT * FROM table WHERE id = {{id}}; ]]></query>
      <count_query><![CDATA[ SELECT COUNT(*) FROM table; ]]></count_query>

      <!-- Response -->
      <response_structure>auto</response_structure>
      <success_status_code>200</success_status_code>

      <!-- Security -->
      <api_keys_collections>mobile_apps,web_apps</api_keys_collections>
      <authorize>
        <provider>my_auth_provider</provider>
      </authorize>

      <!-- Caching -->
      <cache>
        <duration_in_seconds>300</duration_in_seconds>
      </cache>

      <!-- CORS (endpoint-level override) -->
      <cors>
        <pattern><![CDATA[^(localhost|.*\.mysite\.com)$]]></pattern>
        <fallback_origin>https://www.mysite.com</fallback_origin>
      </cors>

      <!-- File Management -->
      <file_management>
        <!-- Covered in the file uploads topic -->
      </file_management>

    </endpoint_name>
  </queries>
</settings>
```

### Tag-by-Tag Reference

| Tag | Required | Default | Description |
|-----|----------|---------|-------------|
| `<route>` | No | XML tag name | URL path. Supports `{{param}}` placeholders. |
| `<verb>` | No | Any verb | HTTP method: `GET`, `POST`, `PUT`, `DELETE`, `PATCH` |
| `<mandatory_parameters>` | No | None | Comma-separated params. Missing → HTTP 400. |
| `<connection_string_name>` | No | `default` | Which connection string from settings.xml. |
| `<query>` | **Yes** | — | SQL wrapped in `<![CDATA[...]]>`. |
| `<count_query>` | No | None | Pagination count query. Wraps response in `{ count, data }`. |
| `<response_structure>` | No | `auto` | `auto`, `single`, `array`, or `file`. |
| `<success_status_code>` | No | `200` | HTTP status for successful responses. |
| `<api_keys_collections>` | No | None | Comma-separated API key collection names from api_keys.xml. |
| `<authorize>` | No | None | JWT/OIDC auth configuration. |
| `<cache>` | No | None | Response caching settings. |
| `<cors>` | No | Global setting | Per-endpoint CORS override. |
| `<file_management>` | No | None | File upload/download configuration. |

## Connection Strings in settings.xml

You can define multiple connection strings for different databases:

```xml
<ConnectionStrings>
  <!-- Default: auto-detected SQL Server -->
  <default><![CDATA[Data Source=.\SQLEXPRESS;Initial Catalog=test;Integrated Security=True;TrustServerCertificate=True;]]></default>

  <!-- Named connection: PostgreSQL -->
  <analytics provider="Npgsql"><![CDATA[Host=analytics.example.com;Database=analytics;Username=user;Password=pass;]]></analytics>

  <!-- Named connection: SQLite -->
  <cache_db provider="Microsoft.Data.Sqlite"><![CDATA[Data Source=cache.db;]]></cache_db>
</ConnectionStrings>
```

Use the `<connection_string_name>` tag in your endpoint to select a specific connection:

```xml
<analytics_report>
  <connection_string_name>analytics</connection_string_name>
  <query><![CDATA[ SELECT * FROM daily_report; ]]></query>
</analytics_report>
```

If omitted, the `default` connection string is used. The supported database providers are:

| Database | `provider` Attribute | Auto-Detected? |
|----------|---------------------|----------------|
| SQL Server | `Microsoft.Data.SqlClient` | Yes |
| PostgreSQL | `Npgsql` | Yes |
| MySQL/MariaDB | `MySqlConnector` | Yes |
| SQLite | `Microsoft.Data.Sqlite` | Yes |
| Oracle | `Oracle.ManagedDataAccess.Core` | Yes |
| IBM DB2 | `Net.IBM.Data.Db2` | Yes |

## Global Settings in settings.xml

### Debug Mode

In production, SQL error details are hidden. Debug mode lets you see them:

```xml
<debug_mode_header_value>my-secret-key</debug_mode_header_value>
```

Send this header to see SQL errors in the response:
```bash
curl -H "debug-mode: my-secret-key" http://localhost:5165/broken_endpoint
```

Without this header, errors return a generic message instead:
```xml
<generic_error_message><![CDATA[An error occurred while processing your request.]]></generic_error_message>
```

### Database Timeout

Set a global timeout (in seconds) for all database queries:

```xml
<db_command_timeout>30</db_command_timeout>
```

### Max Payload Size

```xml
<max_payload_size_in_bytes>367001600</max_payload_size_in_bytes>
```

### Global CORS

Define a default CORS policy for all endpoints:

```xml
<cors>
  <pattern><![CDATA[^(localhost|.*\.example\.com)$]]></pattern>
  <fallback_origin>https://www.example.com</fallback_origin>
  <max_age>86400</max_age>
</cors>
```

- `<pattern>` — Regex checked against the request's `Origin` header. If it matches, the origin is echoed back in `Access-Control-Allow-Origin`.
- `<fallback_origin>` — Used when the origin doesn't match the pattern.
- Endpoint-level `<cors>` overrides this global setting.

## Configuration Encryption

Sensitive values (connection strings, API secrets) can be encrypted at rest:

```xml
<settings_encryption>
  <encryption_prefix>encrypted:</encryption_prefix>
  <data_protection_key_path>./keys/</data_protection_key_path>
  <sections_to_encrypt>
    <section>ConnectionStrings</section>
    <section>api_keys_collections:external_vendors</section>
  </sections_to_encrypt>
</settings_encryption>
```

The application supports two encryption methods, chosen automatically:

| Priority | Condition | Method |
|----------|-----------|--------|
| 1 | `data_protection_key_path` is configured | ASP.NET Core Data Protection API (cross-platform) |
| 2 | Running on Windows (no key path) | Windows DPAPI |
| 3 | Neither of the above | Encryption disabled (passthrough — values stored as plain text) |

**On Windows**, `<data_protection_key_path>` is optional — if omitted, the application falls back to Windows DPAPI automatically. **On Linux/macOS**, you must configure `<data_protection_key_path>` or encryption will silently be disabled.

The key path can also be set via the `DATA_PROTECTION_KEY_PATH` environment variable.

On first run, the application:
1. Reads the unencrypted values
2. Encrypts them using the resolved encryption method
3. Writes the encrypted values back to the file (prefixed with `encrypted:`)
4. Keeps decrypted values in memory for runtime use

After encryption, your connection string in the file looks like:
```xml
<default>encrypted:CfDJ8NhY2kBx7vF...</default>
```

> **Note**: Encrypted values are machine-specific. When deploying to a new server, use the plain-text values and let the application encrypt them on first run.

## Splitting Endpoints Across Multiple Files

You're not limited to a single `sql.xml`. You can organize endpoints into multiple files:

```xml
<!-- settings.xml -->
<additional_configurations>
  <path>config/contacts_api.xml</path>
  <path>config/products_api.xml</path>
  <path>config/reports_api.xml</path>
  <path>config/api_keys.xml</path>
</additional_configurations>
```

Each file follows the same structure. This is useful for large projects with many endpoints — organize by domain, team, or feature.

## The regex.xml File

This file controls how parameters are detected in SQL queries. The defaults work for most use cases:

| Marker | Default Pattern | Example |
|--------|----------------|---------|
| `{{param}}` | Generic — resolved from all sources | `{{name}}` |
| `{j{param}}` | JSON payload only | `{j{name}}` |
| `{qs{param}}` | Query string only | `{qs{search}}` |
| `{r{param}}` | Route only | `{r{id}}` |
| `{h{param}}` | HTTP headers only | `{h{Authorization}}` |
| `{f{param}}` | Form data only | `{f{username}}` |
| `{auth{claim}}` | JWT claims | `{auth{email}}` |
| `{http{...}http}` | Embedded HTTP calls | See advanced topics |

The **specific decorators** (`{j{}`, `{qs{}`, etc.) are useful when you need to force a parameter to come from a specific source, avoiding conflicts when the same name exists in multiple sources.

You can customize these patterns globally in `regex.xml` or per-endpoint by adding the pattern as an attribute on the `<query>` node.

---

### What You Learned

- The configuration file hierarchy and how `settings.xml` references other files
- Hot-reload behavior for all configuration files
- The complete list of endpoint tags in `sql.xml`
- How connection strings work with multiple databases and providers
- Global settings: debug mode, CORS, timeouts
- Configuration encryption for sensitive values
- How to split endpoints across multiple XML files
- Parameter source-specific decorators (`{j{}`, `{qs{}`, `{r{}`, etc.)

---

**Next:** [Input Validation with Regex →](07-regex-validation.md)

**[Back to Tutorial Index](index.md)**

Commit message:

docs: mention encryption hot-reload - no restart needed
The encryption configuration is monitored via ChangeToken. Adding new
sections or values triggers automatic encryption on file save without
requiring an application restart. Fixed both tutorial and reference docs.

docs/tutorial/06-xml-structure.md, after:

# XML Configuration Structure

So far we've been adding endpoints and tags to `sql.xml` without stepping back to look at the full picture. In this topic, we'll explore the complete XML configuration system — how files relate to each other, what every tag does, and how configuration features like hot-reload, encryption, and multi-file organization work.

## The Configuration File Map

```
config/
├── settings.xml          ← The hub: connection strings, global settings, file references
├── sql.xml               ← API endpoint definitions
├── api_keys.xml          ← API key collections
├── api_gateway.xml       ← Proxy/gateway route definitions
├── file_management.xml   ← File upload/download store configurations
├── auth_providers.xml    ← OIDC/JWT authentication providers
└── regex.xml             ← Custom parameter regex patterns
```

**`settings.xml` is the hub** — it references all other config files through the `<additional_configurations>` block:

```xml
<settings>
  <ConnectionStrings>
    <default><![CDATA[...]]></default>
  </ConnectionStrings>

  <additional_configurations>
    <path>config/sql.xml</path>
    <path>config/api_gateway.xml</path>
    <path>config/api_keys.xml</path>
    <path>config/file_management.xml</path>
    <path>config/regex.xml</path>
    <path>config/auth_providers.xml</path>
  </additional_configurations>
</settings>
```

The application reads `settings.xml` first, then loads each file listed in `<additional_configurations>`. All loaded configurations merge into a single in-memory settings tree.

## Hot-Reload: Edit Without Restarting

All configuration files are monitored for changes. When you save a file:

1. The application detects the change
2. It reloads the affected configuration
3. New requests use the updated configuration

**No restart required.** This applies to all config files — `sql.xml`, `api_keys.xml`, `api_gateway.xml`, etc.

> **Exception**: Adding or removing `<path>` entries in `<additional_configurations>` may require a restart depending on the `<restart_on_path_changes>` setting. Content changes within existing files always reload automatically.

## The Complete sql.xml Tag Reference

Here's every tag you can use inside an endpoint definition:

```xml
<settings>
  <queries>  <!-- Some config files use <queries>, the endpoing definitions work the same regardless -->
    <endpoint_name>

      <!-- Routing -->
      <route>custom/path/{{id}}</route>
      <verb>GET</verb>

      <!-- Parameters -->
      <mandatory_parameters>id,name</mandatory_parameters>

      <!-- Database -->
      <connection_string_name>analytics</connection_string_name>

      <!-- Query -->
      <query><![CDATA[ SELECT * FROM table WHERE id = {{id}}; ]]></query>
      <count_query><![CDATA[ SELECT COUNT(*) FROM table; ]]></count_query>

      <!-- Response -->
      <response_structure>auto</response_structure>
      <success_status_code>200</success_status_code>

      <!-- Security -->
      <api_keys_collections>mobile_apps,web_apps</api_keys_collections>
      <authorize>
        <provider>my_auth_provider</provider>
      </authorize>

      <!-- Caching -->
      <cache>
        <duration_in_seconds>300</duration_in_seconds>
      </cache>

      <!-- CORS (endpoint-level override) -->
      <cors>
        <pattern><![CDATA[^(localhost|.*\.mysite\.com)$]]></pattern>
        <fallback_origin>https://www.mysite.com</fallback_origin>
      </cors>

      <!-- File Management -->
      <file_management>
        <!-- Covered in the file uploads topic -->
      </file_management>

    </endpoint_name>
  </queries>
</settings>
```

### Tag-by-Tag Reference

| Tag | Required | Default | Description |
|-----|----------|---------|-------------|
| `<route>` | No | XML tag name | URL path. Supports `{{param}}` placeholders. |
| `<verb>` | No | Any verb | HTTP method: `GET`, `POST`, `PUT`, `DELETE`, `PATCH` |
| `<mandatory_parameters>` | No | None | Comma-separated params. Missing → HTTP 400. |
| `<connection_string_name>` | No | `default` | Which connection string from settings.xml. |
| `<query>` | **Yes** | — | SQL wrapped in `<![CDATA[...]]>`. |
| `<count_query>` | No | None | Pagination count query. Wraps response in `{ count, data }`. |
| `<response_structure>` | No | `auto` | `auto`, `single`, `array`, or `file`. |
| `<success_status_code>` | No | `200` | HTTP status for successful responses. |
| `<api_keys_collections>` | No | None | Comma-separated API key collection names from api_keys.xml. |
| `<authorize>` | No | None | JWT/OIDC auth configuration. |
| `<cache>` | No | None | Response caching settings. |
| `<cors>` | No | Global setting | Per-endpoint CORS override. |
| `<file_management>` | No | None | File upload/download configuration. |

## Connection Strings in settings.xml

You can define multiple connection strings for different databases:

```xml
<ConnectionStrings>
  <!-- Default: auto-detected SQL Server -->
  <default><![CDATA[Data Source=.\SQLEXPRESS;Initial Catalog=test;Integrated Security=True;TrustServerCertificate=True;]]></default>

  <!-- Named connection: PostgreSQL -->
  <analytics provider="Npgsql"><![CDATA[Host=analytics.example.com;Database=analytics;Username=user;Password=pass;]]></analytics>

  <!-- Named connection: SQLite -->
  <cache_db provider="Microsoft.Data.Sqlite"><![CDATA[Data Source=cache.db;]]></cache_db>
</ConnectionStrings>
```

Use the `<connection_string_name>` tag in your endpoint to select a specific connection:

```xml
<analytics_report>
  <connection_string_name>analytics</connection_string_name>
  <query><![CDATA[ SELECT * FROM daily_report; ]]></query>
</analytics_report>
```

If omitted, the `default` connection string is used. The supported database providers are:

| Database | `provider` Attribute | Auto-Detected? |
|----------|---------------------|----------------|
| SQL Server | `Microsoft.Data.SqlClient` | Yes |
| PostgreSQL | `Npgsql` | Yes |
| MySQL/MariaDB | `MySqlConnector` | Yes |
| SQLite | `Microsoft.Data.Sqlite` | Yes |
| Oracle | `Oracle.ManagedDataAccess.Core` | Yes |
| IBM DB2 | `Net.IBM.Data.Db2` | Yes |

## Global Settings in settings.xml

### Debug Mode

In production, SQL error details are hidden. Debug mode lets you see them:

```xml
<debug_mode_header_value>my-secret-key</debug_mode_header_value>
```

Send this header to see SQL errors in the response:
```bash
curl -H "debug-mode: my-secret-key" http://localhost:5165/broken_endpoint
```

Without this header, errors return a generic message instead:
```xml
<generic_error_message><![CDATA[An error occurred while processing your request.]]></generic_error_message>
```

### Database Timeout

Set a global timeout (in seconds) for all database queries:

```xml
<db_command_timeout>30</db_command_timeout>
```

### Max Payload Size

```xml
<max_payload_size_in_bytes>367001600</max_payload_size_in_bytes>
```

### Global CORS

Define a default CORS policy for all endpoints:

```xml
<cors>
  <pattern><![CDATA[^(localhost|.*\.example\.com)$]]></pattern>
  <fallback_origin>https://www.example.com</fallback_origin>
  <max_age>86400</max_age>
</cors>
```

- `<pattern>` — Regex checked against the request's `Origin` header. If it matches, the origin is echoed back in `Access-Control-Allow-Origin`.
- `<fallback_origin>` — Used when the origin doesn't match the pattern.
- Endpoint-level `<cors>` overrides this global setting.

## Configuration Encryption

Sensitive values (connection strings, API secrets) can be encrypted at rest:

```xml
<settings_encryption>
  <encryption_prefix>encrypted:</encryption_prefix>
  <data_protection_key_path>./keys/</data_protection_key_path>
  <sections_to_encrypt>
    <section>ConnectionStrings</section>
    <section>api_keys_collections:external_vendors</section>
  </sections_to_encrypt>
</settings_encryption>
```

The application supports two encryption methods, chosen automatically:

| Priority | Condition | Method |
|----------|-----------|--------|
| 1 | `data_protection_key_path` is configured | ASP.NET Core Data Protection API (cross-platform) |
| 2 | Running on Windows (no key path) | Windows DPAPI |
| 3 | Neither of the above | Encryption disabled (passthrough — values stored as plain text) |

**On Windows**, `<data_protection_key_path>` is optional — if omitted, the application falls back to Windows DPAPI automatically. **On Linux/macOS**, you must configure `<data_protection_key_path>` or encryption will silently be disabled.

The key path can also be set via the `DATA_PROTECTION_KEY_PATH` environment variable.

On first run, the application:
1. Reads the unencrypted values in the configured sections
2. Encrypts them using the resolved encryption method
3. Writes the encrypted values back to the file (prefixed with `encrypted:`)
4. Keeps decrypted values in memory for runtime use

The encryption configuration is **monitored for changes** — if you add a new section to `<sections_to_encrypt>` and save the file, the application picks it up immediately and encrypts the new values without a restart.

After encryption, your connection string in the file looks like:
```xml
<default>encrypted:CfDJ8NhY2kBx7vF...</default>
```

> **Note**: Encrypted values are machine-specific. When deploying to a new server, use the plain-text values and let the application encrypt them on first run.

## Splitting Endpoints Across Multiple Files

You're not limited to a single `sql.xml`. You can organize endpoints into multiple files:

```xml
<!-- settings.xml -->
<additional_configurations>
  <path>config/contacts_api.xml</path>
  <path>config/products_api.xml</path>
  <path>config/reports_api.xml</path>
  <path>config/api_keys.xml</path>
</additional_configurations>
```

Each file follows the same structure. This is useful for large projects with many endpoints — organize by domain, team, or feature.

## The regex.xml File

This file controls how parameters are detected in SQL queries. The defaults work for most use cases:

| Marker | Default Pattern | Example |
|--------|----------------|---------|
| `{{param}}` | Generic — resolved from all sources | `{{name}}` |
| `{j{param}}` | JSON payload only | `{j{name}}` |
| `{qs{param}}` | Query string only | `{qs{search}}` |
| `{r{param}}` | Route only | `{r{id}}` |
| `{h{param}}` | HTTP headers only | `{h{Authorization}}` |
| `{f{param}}` | Form data only | `{f{username}}` |
| `{auth{claim}}` | JWT claims | `{auth{email}}` |
| `{http{...}http}` | Embedded HTTP calls | See advanced topics |

The **specific decorators** (`{j{}`, `{qs{}`, etc.) are useful when you need to force a parameter to come from a specific source, avoiding conflicts when the same name exists in multiple sources.

You can customize these patterns globally in `regex.xml` or per-endpoint by adding the pattern as an attribute on the `<query>` node.

---

### What You Learned

- The configuration file hierarchy and how `settings.xml` references other files
- Hot-reload behavior for all configuration files
- The complete list of endpoint tags in `sql.xml`
- How connection strings work with multiple databases and providers
- Global settings: debug mode, CORS, timeouts
- Configuration encryption for sensitive values
- How to split endpoints across multiple XML files
- Parameter source-specific decorators (`{j{}`, `{qs{}`, `{r{}`, etc.)

---

**Next:** [Input Validation with Regex →](07-regex-validation.md)

**[Back to Tutorial Index](index.md)**
